= Did Alfred Lotka acknowledge his influence on Paul Samuelson?
Clément Levallois <clementlevallois@gmail.com>
2017-01-09
:revnumber: 1.0
:example-caption!:
:sourcedir: ../../main/java

I have finally a convenient solution to write my blog posts (see https://github.com/seinecle/blog/blob/master/src/main/asciidoc/05-01-2017-1.adoc[here]), so I finally "put on paper" things I had in store.

This is a short one: a piece of archive documenting the intellectual connection between Alfred Lotka and Paul Samuelson, extracted from my https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-00372263/[PhD dissertation] [in French].

Lotka (1880-1849) is a key figure in mathematical biology, Samuelson (1915-2009) is a key figure in mathematical economics.
I argue in my PhD dissertation that Lotka influenced Samuelson (building up on Weintraub footnote:[Weintraub, E. Roy (1991), Stabilizing Dynamics: Constructing Economic Knowledge, Cambridge, UK : Cambridge University Press (Historical Perspectives on Modern Economics).] here).

But we might be curious: was Lotka aware of this influence? What would have he made of it?

Samuelson hints that he entertained a correspondance with Lotka (Samuelson 1976footnote:[Samuelson, P. A. (1976), « Resolving a historical confusion in population analysis », Human Biology, 48, (3), September, pp. 559-580.]).
Samuelson also explains he personally attended seminar sessions at the American Economic Association, where Lotka was presenting:

_____
"Early on I did have math biological interests: actuarial methods applied to auto replacement; Verhulst Pearl logistic growth theories; Lotka Sharpe and Kuczynski demography; Cole Keyfitz demography; Lotka Volterra predator prey models; Fisher Haldane Wright genetics. […] I knew Lotka personally and was amused by his arguments with Gabriel Preinich at the American Economic Association. I knew all the 100+ papers in his bibliography" footnote:[Samuelson to Clément Levallois, personal correspondance, 22 March 2007].
_____

And indeed, I found in the papers of Lotka archived at Princeton that Lotka had a copy of Samuelson's "The stability of equilibrium : comparative statics and dynamics" (Samuelson 1943footnote:[Samuelson, Paul A. (1941), « The stability of equilibrium: comparative statics and dynamics », Econometrica, 9, (2), April, pp. 97-120.]), which introduces for the first time in economics the principle of comparative statics, applied  to Keynesian economics.

On the cover of this reprint, that Samuelson had sent him, Lotka had penciled: "Phys Biol Chapter 6", indicating his intention to use this material for the revision of his _Elements of Physical Biology_, which he was working on.footnote:[Boîte 7, dossier 6, A. J. Lotka Papers, Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University] (Lotka did not complete this second edition)

There is a second interesting piece in Lotka's archives: a letter he received in 1943 from George Lundberg, the President of the American Sociological Society.  Lundberg writes:

____
Permit me to remark again […] upon the tremendous stimulus which I received from your ELEMENTS OF PHYSICAL BIOLOGY. I should like to attempt a work of that type in sociology someday unless in the meantime someone more competent does so. footnote:[Lundberg to Lotka, May 10, 1943, Boîte 3, Dossier 3, LPPU].
____

We can follow the thoughts of Lotka, as if peering above his shoulder when he read this letter, with the hand written note Lotka left in the margin of the last sentence:

____
Richardson ? Samuelson Econometrica
____

Here we see that Lotka had identified Samuelson as his intellectual follower in economicsfootnote:[Lewis Richardson is a political scientist interested in conflicts resolution, who made use of the Lotka Volterra prey predator model].
On a personal note, it was a pleasure I could send a copy of this document to Paul Samuelson in 2007.

A full history remains to be written on the relationships Samuelson entertained with biology.
I hope an historian is set to this task!
